one day in the fall of 1906, the British scientist Francis Galton left his home in the town of Plymouth and headed for a country fair. Galton was eighty-five years old and beginning to feel his age, but he was still brimming with the curiosity that had won him renown and notoriety for his work on statistics and the science of heredity. And on that particular day, what Galton was curious about was livestock. Galton's destination was the annual West of England Fat Stock and Poultry Exhibition, a regional fair where the local farmers and townspeople gathered to appraise the quality of each other's cattle, sheep, chickens, horses, and pigs. Wandering through rows of stalls examining workhorses and prize hogs may seem to have been a strange way for a scientist (especially an elderly one) to spend an afternoon, but there was a certain logic to it. Galtonwas a man obsessed with two things: the measurement of physical and mental qualities, and breeding. And what, after all, is a live-stock show but a big showcase for the effects of good and bad breeding Breeding mattered to Galton because he believed that only avery few people had the characteristics necessary to keep societies healthy. He had devoted much of his career to measuring those characteristics, in fact, in order to prove that the vast majority ofpeople did not have them. At the International Exhibition of 1884 in London, for instance, he set up an 'Anthropometric Laboratory,"where he used devices of his own making to test exhibition-goerson, among other things, their "Keenness of Sight and of Hearing,Colour Sense, Judgment of Eye, and Reaction Time." His experiments left him with little faith in the intelligence of the average person, "the stupidity and wrong-headedness of many men and women being so great as to be scarcely credible." Only if power and control stayed in the hands of the select, well-bred few, Galton believed, could a society remain healthy and strong.As he walked through the exhibition that day, Galton came across a weight-judging competition. A fat ox had been selected and placed on display, and members of a gathering crowd were lining upto place wagers on the weight of the ox. (Or rather, they were placing wagers on what the weight of the ox would be after it had been "slaughtered and dressed.") For six pence, you could buy a stamped and numbered ticket, where you filled in your name, your address, and your estimate. The best guesses would receive prizes.Eight hundred people tried their luck. They were a diverse lot.Many of them were butchers and farmers, who were presumably ex-pert at judging the weight of livestock, but there were also quite a few people who had, as it were, no insider knowledge of cattle."Many non-experts competed," Galton wrote later in the scientific journal Nature, "like those clerks and others who have no expert knowledge of horses, but who bet on races, guided by newspapers friends and their own fancies." The analogy to a democracy, in which people of radically different abilities and interests each get one vote, had suggested itself to Galton immediately. "The average competitor was probably as well fitted for making a just estimate of the dressed weight of the ox, as an average voter is of judging the merits of most political issues on which he votes," he wrote.
